feat: initial storage slots docs (#2842)
AztecProtocol/aztec-packages: docs/docs/dev_docs/contracts/syntax/storage/storage_slots.md

---
title: Storage slots
---

> From the description of [storage slot in concepts](./../../../../concepts/foundation/state_model/storage_slots.md) you will get an idea around the logic of storage slots. In this section we will go into more detail to walk through an entire example of how storage slots are computed for private state to improve that intuition. Recall, that storage slots are only a logical construct in private, and are not "actually" used for lookups, but rather as a value to constrain against.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the description of [storage slot in concepts](./../../../../concepts/foundation/state_model/storage_slots.md) you will get an idea around the logic of storage slots. In this section we will go into more detail and walk through an entire example of how storage slots are computed for private state to improve our storage slot intuition. Recall, that storage slots are only a logical construct in the private domain, and are not "actually" used for lookups, but rather just as a value to constrain against.
```

For the case of the example, we will look at what is inserted into the private data tree when adding a note in the Token contract. Specifically, we are looking at the last part of the `transfer` function:

#include_code increase_private_balance yarn-project/noir-contracts/src/contracts/token_contract/src/main.nr rust

> This function is creating a new note and inserting it note into the balance set of the recipient `to`. Recall that to ensure privacy, only the note commitment is really inserted into the private data tree. To share the contents of the note with `to` the contract can emit an encrypted log (which this one does), or it can require an out-of-band data transfer sharing the information. Below, we will walk through the steps of how the note commitment is computed and inserted into the tree. For this, we don't care about the encrypted log, so we are going to ignore that part of the function call for now. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This function is creating a new note and inserting it into the balance set of the recipient `to`. Recall that to ensure privacy, only the note commitment is really inserted into the private data tree. To share the contents of the note with `to` the contract can emit an encrypted log (which this one does), or it can require an out-of-band data transfer sharing the information. Below, we will walk through the steps of how the note commitment is computed and inserted into the tree. For this, we don't care about the encrypted log, so we are going to ignore that part of the function call for now. 
```

> Outlining it in more detail below as a sequence diagram, we can see how the calls make their way down the stack, and in the end is computing a siloed note hash in the kernel. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Outlining it in more detail below as a sequence diagram, we can see how the calls make their way down the stack.
In the end a siloed note hash is computed in the kernel. 
```

    LifeCycle->>Utils: compute_inner_note_hash(note)
    Utils->>TokenNote: compute_note_hash(note)
    TokenNote->>Utils: note_hash = H(amount, to, randomness)
    Utils->>NoteHash: compute_inner_hash(derived_slot, note_hash)
    NoteHash->>LifeCycle: inner_note_hash = H(derived_slot, note_hash)
    LifeCycle->>Context: push_new_note_hash(inner_note_hash)
    end
    Context->>Kernel: siloed_note_hash = H(contract_address, inner_note_hash)
```

To clarify what the commitment inserted from above (the `siloed_note_hash`) really is we "unroll" the values to their simplest components. This gives us a better idea around what is actually inserted into the tree.

```rust
siloed_note_hash = H(contract_address, inner_note_hash)
siloed_note_hash = H(contract_address, H(derived_slot, note_hash))
siloed_note_hash = H(contract_address, H(H(map_slot, to), note_hash))
siloed_note_hash = H(contract_address, H(H(map_slot, to), H(amount, to, randomness)))
```

Where the `map_slot` is the slot specified in `Storage::init`, recall:

#include_code storage_balances_init yarn-project/noir-contracts/src/contracts/token_contract/src/main.nr rust

> And `to` is the actor to receive the note, `amount` of the note and `randomness` is the randomness used to make the note hiding. Without the `randomness` the note could could just as well be plaintext.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And `to` is the actor who receives the note, `amount` of the note and `randomness` is the randomness used to make the note hiding. Without the `randomness` the note could could just as well be plaintext (computational cost of a preimage attack would be trivial in such a case).
```

---
title: Storage slots
---

> From the description of [storage slot in concepts](./../../../../concepts/foundation/state_model/storage_slots.md) you will get an idea around the logic of storage slots. In this section we will go into more detail and walk through an entire example of how storage slots are computed for private state to improve our storage slot intuition. Recall, that storage slots are only a logical construct in the private domain, and are not "actually" used for lookups, but rather just as a value to constrain against.

Reviewer 2: > Recall, that storage slots are only a logical construct in the private domain

This could be misread as storage slots are only a 'thing' in the private domain; and not used in the public domain.

Perhaps "Recall, that in the private domain, storage slots are only a logical construct...

Some of the syntax below is a little butchered to make it easier to follow variables without the full code.
:::

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    alt Call
    Token->>BalanceMap: Map::new(map_slot);
    Token->>Token: to_bal = storage.balances.at(to)
    Token->>BalanceMap: BalanceMap.at(to)
    BalanceMap->>BalanceMap: derived_slot = H(map_slot, to)
    BalanceMap->>BalanceSet: BalanceSet::new(to, derived_slot)
    Token->>BalanceSet: to_bal.add(amount)
    BalanceSet->>BalanceSet: note = TokenNote::new(amount, to)
    BalanceSet->>Set: insert(note)
    Set->>LifeCycle: create_note(derived_slot, note)
    LifeCycle->>LifeCycle: note.header = NoteHeader { contract_address, <br> storage_slot: derived_slot, nonce: 0, is_transient: true }
    LifeCycle->>Utils: compute_inner_note_hash(note)
    Utils->>TokenNote: compute_note_hash(note)
    TokenNote->>Utils: note_hash = H(amount, to, randomness)
    Utils->>NoteHash: compute_inner_hash(derived_slot, note_hash)
    NoteHash->>LifeCycle: inner_note_hash = H(derived_slot, note_hash)
    LifeCycle->>Context: push_new_note_hash(inner_note_hash)
    end
    Context->>Kernel: siloed_note_hash = H(contract_address, inner_note_hash)
```

> To clarify what the commitment inserted from above (the `siloed_note_hash`) really is we "unroll" the values to their simplest components. This gives us a better idea around what is actually inserted into the tree.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Notice the `siloed_note_hash` at the very end. It's a commitment that will be inserted into the private data tree. To clarify what this really is, we "unroll" the values to their simplest components. This gives us a better idea around what is actually inserted into the tree.
```

```rust
siloed_note_hash = H(contract_address, inner_note_hash)
siloed_note_hash = H(contract_address, H(derived_slot, note_hash))
siloed_note_hash = H(contract_address, H(H(map_slot, to), note_hash))
siloed_note_hash = H(contract_address, H(H(map_slot, to), H(amount, to, randomness)))
```

Where the `map_slot` is the slot specified in `Storage::init`, recall:

#include_code storage_balances_init yarn-project/noir-contracts/src/contracts/token_contract/src/main.nr rust

And `to` is the actor who receives the note, `amount` of the note and `randomness` is the randomness used to make the note hiding. Without the `randomness` the note could could just as well be plaintext (computational cost of a preimage attack would be trivial in such a case).

:::info

> Beware that this hash computation is what the aztec.nr libraries is doing, and not strict requirements by the network (only the kernel computation is).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Beware that this hash computation is what the aztec.nr library is doing, and not strictly required by the network (only the kernel computation is).
```

:::

With this note structure, the contract can require that only notes sitting at specific storage slots can be used by specific operations, e.g., if transferring funds from `from` to `to`, the notes to destroy should be linked to `H(map_slot, from)` and the new notes (except the change-note) should be linked to `H(map_slot, to)`.

> That way, we can have logical storage slots, without them really exiting. This means that knowing the storage slot for a note is not enough to actually figure out what is in there (which it is in public).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That way, we can have logical storage slots, without them really existing. This means that knowing the storage slot for a note is not enough to actually figure out what is in there (whereas it would be for looking up public state).
```
